from that experience.
I saw what the possibilities were.
I saw that
A woman could be a professor.
I wouldn't have known that up to that point.
And so, and I think that was one of the things that I did for my students.
I think the fact that they saw me in class, that I was able to give them an example, a model of someone who could do an effective job in a career that they had never thought was possible before.
and that maybe that might help them to consider that whatever they wanted to do, you could do if you wanted to do it bad enough.
And if you were willing to put in the kind of time and effort and discipline and so on, that was a great... And I always say, you know, if you couldn't do the work, you wouldn't be here.
I said, you're here because you are qualified to be here.
So that if you don't make it, it's not because you're not qualified.
It's because you aren't exercising the necessary discipline and organization and an interest.
And so therefore, how you do in this class is really up to you.
I mean, there are only two things that it takes in a classroom out of the three possibilities to have a really great learning experience.
You have good materials, you have a good instructor, and you have good students.
And I'd say,
I know the materials are good, and I know that all of you are good.
I may not qualify, but even so, everything is available for you to have a really great learning experience.
So it's up to you.
And particularly in those earlier days with co-eds, did any co-eds ever come to you with any unusual circumstance?
Yes, yes.
Can you share any of those?
Well, some of them were very confidential.
Okay.
But they were, they were bitter experiences.
And if not being properly listened to about those experiences of being
of being treated like they were the ones who had invited the experience.
And that was one of the most troubling aspects of my being at this institution, of feeling that a number of the women
were not getting the kind of understanding about the experience, the very unhappy experience which they had had.
I was not happy about that.
I also had experiences of women who were in the Corps who had very unhappy experiences and who would come and talk to me about it.
And I would try to help them to know what to do and how to do it.
But there were certain things that they felt that they could not do because of the traditions in the Corps and about the way that they were going to be blackballed
And I regret to say that that still happens.
I regret to say that.
And I was on one of the president's committees to look into that.
And I worked very hard to try to build a leadership program that would look to the situations of discrimination in women.
And I had a
I had a particularly good opportunity to understand what it was all about.
Because one of my graduate students, Judy Luckett, was the head of the American History Department at West Point.
And I was very proud of her.
And she's a full colonel.
And so when I was appointed to this president's committee,
I talked to Judy and I asked her if she could help me how they had worked it out at West Point and what kinds of things that she would suggest to incorporate into a leadership program that would help the Aggies to understand the importance of treating all persons with equality and with respect, etc.
And, you know, traditions are fine when they're really good traditions.
But when the traditions can be hurtful to other human beings, then it's time to discard.
And so I worked very hard at that.
And I did help.
I worked with Manuel Davenport to build a leadership program.
And we did a lot of research and a lot of consulting.
And we looked to the Air University for their programs.
And at that time, I was on the historical advisory to the Secretary of the Navy.
And I had a very good friend who was an admiral who
did all this work in leadership training.
And I consulted with him, and he sent me the videotapes of the way in which he did it.
And we incorporated all of this into a leadership training program here, which I thought if it was really, if it was really done effectively, could perhaps over the long run bring about some change.
But it's not just working at it intellectually.
It has to be demonstrated experientially.
After being away 17 years for me and my wife, and now being back two years, I'm a bit concerned that the Corps has not progressed forward in terms of staying up to date
as well as the rest of the university has.
Is that?
Yeah.
I feel the same way.
And I certainly have worked hard at trying to do something about this.
And when I get women in my, and we have had some outstanding
They were first-rate people, and not all of them have had a bad experience, not all of them, so that wouldn't be fair to say, but I'm afraid too many of them.
What about when you first arrived, we had not had many black minority students.
That's right.
We had had minority students of other sort.
Yes.
Did you have any class or?
or hallway minority incidents that you experienced?
Yes, I did.
And this was the very first time that I, the very first years that I was here.
I had an African-American student who enrolled in my East Asian class.
And he was another one of these students who just had the world opened up to him by this exposure to this different culture and this different history and philosophical and religious background, etc.
And so he was another one of these students who used to come to see me after class, talk about the material, ask for more to read, etc.
And he had come from
an all-black high school in Waco.
So when he came here, this was his first exposure to being with white students.
And he used to tell me how difficult it was.
And then he told me something about a terrible experience where they had put this big sign in his dorm which said something like, nigger go home.
and how he came to my office and how deeply hurt he was.
This kid was very bright, very bright.
He was not only bright, but he was a deeply spiritual kid.
And so I remember that one of the things that I did at one point was there's a United Methodist retreat up in Palestine, and there was a spiritual retreat up there.
And I was taking some students up to that retreat, and I invited Giles to go.
And he was just delighted.
He was just thrilled.
And on the way up there, we stopped to eat, and we couldn't eat in a restaurant because he was there.
And I had had that experience earlier on with a very dear black friend at Harvard.
And it had been a new experience for me because I was raised in an area where there were no blacks at all.
And she...
She had been just such a wonderful inspiration to me as a graduate student.
She had been five years or so ahead finishing up a PhD when I was a beginning student, and she had just taken me under her wing and helped me adjust to what was just a terrifying situation for me.
I was, you know, I was just a kid at the time, and I was scared to death of these
Harvard students and Harvard professor and all that kind of thing, but she was just wonderful.
So my view of African Americans was based on that kind of experience.
I thought that all of them came from their fathers were professors at Tuskegee University, and they were all brilliant, et cetera, et cetera.
And so, I mean, this was such a shock to me.
And so we couldn't eat at this restaurant.
What could we do?
And so we stopped in at one of these 7-Elevens, and we brought the makings of lunch.
And we prepared lunch, and we had it in one of those recreation centers on the way up.
It was a tragic experience for me, and most of all for, I mean, to have to know that this young kid who was so bright and so able had to go through that kind of thing.
And so I certainly supported him in every possible way.
He went on to Michigan, University of Michigan, to law school.
And later he came back, and he was assistant attorney general in Texas.
I have all of his letters that he wrote to me, and they're beautiful, beautiful letters.
And I think that he got a good education here, or he never could have made it as he did.
In these three decades here, have you seen progress in
in minority.
attitudes toward minority students here?
Well, you know, in 76, when we had the centennial year, that was another place where I suddenly found out that I was an Aggie.
Dean Hubert called me and he asked me, he said that I had been nominated to run for the, what was it?
We had an academic council.
And he said, I had been nominated to run for the vice chairperson.
The president was the chairperson, but to run for the vice chairperson of the academic council.
And would I do that?
I said, oh.
I said, no, no way I can get elected.
I said, not at this institution.
And I was running against a man.
And he said, well, he said, don't worry about that.
He said, just say you'll accept the nomination.
He said, after all, you probably, he said, you may not get elected.
And I said, well, I was sure of that.
But to run against this man, who was a very prominent man on the faculty.
So I said, OK, I would submit this election.
Well, it turned out I was elected.
So I got to be the academic chairperson.
That was fun, too, because I don't know whether you were on the council at that time, but there were times when they called me Mr. Chairman.
when I was residing without ever thinking about it because that was just the way to do it.
So that was a fun thing.
And outside of those little things, I felt like they were treating me properly.
Well, it was the centennial year.
And so, of course, I had to be the faculty spokesperson for everything.
And Fred McClure was the, I think, president of the MSC at the time.
Student body.
Student body, yeah.
Well, anyway, so I got to know Fred, and that was just so nice.
He was just, and I felt like, you know, he was just so accepted, it seemed.
So that was a happy experience of seeing him and getting to know him and so on.
And all in all, it was very, that whole experience, and I felt like an Aggie.
I mean, when I got up there and talked about the history of A&M, and I was proud to be an Aggie, and I was proud to be a pioneer.
I had led the argument at the administrative level as dean of faculties, persuading Dr. Calhoun and Dr. Williams
that the old academic council, which was all department heads, deans, and up, was too conservative, meaning too hesitant to change anything.
Yeah.
And that, on the other hand, if you did only faculty with no
administrative restraints.
They might be too liberal.
And so my argument was, let's add elected faculty to the council.
That's right.
That's how I got on the council.
And that was what we did.
And I still think that's a pretty good combination if we hadn't stayed with that because you need somebody to throw out some new ideas and occasionally somebody would say, well now we've tried that and here's what went wrong.
Let's see, do you remember
Did any students ever try any eggy good bull on you as a faculty member?
Any jokes, pranks, teasing?
Well, I'll tell you.
I used to use the discussion approach in class, so I would,
I had a phrase that I would say, a student would say something, and I would never, you know, if it was on a controversial topic, as very often there was controversy in the subjects in U.S.
foreign relations, throughout the Cold War, of course, you know,
So you had to be very careful.
I would never let them know what I thought personally.
I would always just really work with the materials.
And I used documentary materials so that I would ask them to illustrate in terms of the documentary materials.
That's what this was all about.
That was what history was all about, was analysis and interpretation and provision of evidence and all that sort of thing.
So I would often say, well, what do you think about that?
And so that got to be kind of a stock phrase.
And the students on the last day of class, they came in, they said they had a present for me.
And I said, fine.
And I opened up the present, and it was a pink T-shirt that said,
So that was really fun.
To me, that's good, Aggie Bowl, because it means, let's see if you agree with me, I think it means acceptance.
Yeah, I think it did.
I think it did.
Well, I never had any question about acceptance.
I mean, I had more male students who would come in
and sit down and tell me all about their problems.
And one of the things I learned was that the men have just as many problems about their love life as the women do.
I heard all about that.
I tried to tell them the way in which they might work things out with their beloveds of the time or the best course of action in certain sort of situations, et cetera.
I watched them cry because they had been rejected by the girls that they thought were the ones for them.
I tell you, I went through it year after year after year.
I have no illusions about the idea that women are the only one that get to feel bad when they're rejected.
Did you ever have, in these three decades, have you ever had any parental
and or administrative and or legislative attempt to intervene in something you were doing or not doing?
Anybody try to ensure that you gave a certain grade to somebody?
Anybody here attempt to tell you, quit teaching this or that, or quit talking about this or that?
I've had a parent occasionally call me up and ask me about a grade.
But I've always been able to explain to them what was based on.
No, but never, never call me.
You never tried to twist your arm?
No, no, no, no.
And you never heard from a legislator or a...
A&M board member or an administrator, so-and-so's in your class, be sure that that student passes or?
No, no.
I never had that experience.
I sometimes felt that there was a little pressure being exerted about football players.
But that pressure was not, it was not explicit.
You know, it was more implicit.
Well, how's so-and-so doing?
And what do you think he might do to do better?
Or that sort of thing.
But, but I.
Is that in recent years or was that in?
Well, I'll tell you one thing.
Jackie Sherrill years.
Jackie Sherrill.
And I did have a run in with Jackie Sherrill.
Not surprised.
You're not?
Not surprised at all.
Well, one of the things that he said at one point, and I was going to resign from the academic council, from the athletic council at the time, he talked about these long-haired liberal arts professors.
And he, I don't know what his political viewpoint, it must have been, you know, to the right of Attila the Hun.
But at any rate, and I was horrified.
And so were some of the other people in the liberal arts.
And Dan Fallon was the dean at the time.
And so I decided that I was not going to stay on the athletic council.
So I called him up and I said I'd like to talk to him.
And I went over and I talked to Jackie Sherrill.
And I said that was so, not only unnecessary, but I said it was just
you alienated the whole liberal arts college faculty.
And I said that was so discriminating and it was so unbecoming of any kind of a model of Texas A&M University.
We may have our shortcomings, it's true.
But we certainly don't like to publicly have them displayed by a person who is in public, in as public a place as you.
And I said, I'm just, I just don't want to have anything more to do with the athletic council.
And so he said, oh, no, he begged me to stay on.
And he made an overt gesture to Dan Fallon, and he invited Dan Fallon to go
on the next airplane flight with the football team, and I suppose he tried to make his amends.
So that, yeah, on that occasion I was not very happy.
And I, when I was on the athletic council and he was our, our,
our coach, I worked very hard to try to see that I was on the Academic Standards Committee in the Athletic Council and I worked very hard to try to see that we were, we began to raise the standards of the academic standards for the football players and that they had better
and that they got to class and that we began to have a better showing of graduating football players and so on.
So, yeah, that was not a very pleasant experience.
What topics have we not touched so far that we should have?
I'm trying to think of things that I have done.
Oh, I'll tell you another story that was really neat.
You know, I have done a lot of service at the national level.
I've served and chaired the State Department Historical Advisory Committee.
I've been a commissioner on the national
what do you call it, historical documentary projects of the National Archives.
And I've been on the historical advisory committee to the Department of the Army, and to the Secretary of the Navy, and to the Defense Department.
And now I'm on the history review panel to the Central Intelligence Agency.
Well, not to the central, to the director of the central, I have to make that clear.
So, a director of the Central Intelligence Agency.
Well, it so happened that they put the fact that I was on the Historic Advisory Committee, the Secretary of the Navy, in the Aggie magazine.
They like to tell things about that anyway.
And so the next thing I knew, I had a letter from one of the Aggies.
He was an Aggie Marine, and he was on a carrier in
the Gulf during the Gulf War.
And so he wrote and he said, Dear Professor Underbricker, I understand that you're on the Navy Advisory Committee, and I just wondered if you might be able to help us.
We're in really very difficult straits.
General Gray, the commander of the Marine Corps, has said that none of us are going to get promoted unless we read these 30 books
in military and diplomatic history.
He said, but we don't have access to any of these books, he said.
Is there any way that you could help us to get them?
Well, what do you do?
And I read the list of the books.
They were all very reputable historical accounts.
And, you know, I had really been responsible for getting military history transferred from the ROTC to the department.
I had done that while I was on the Historical Advisory Committee to the Department of the Army.
So I felt, I mean, I was just so delighted that they were using these as a criteria for promotion.
So what was I going to do?
So I looked at the list and there were a number of the books that I had.
And so I sent a note around to all the members of the department and I asked them if they had copies of those books.
And then I went to the library and I asked them if they had copies of them.
Well, of course they had copies, but they couldn't give them out.
And so then there was an Aggie who ran
this Xeroxing place.
What is it called down here?
Oh.
Anyway, it was a big Xeroxing place where you could get all kinds of things Xeroxed.
He was an Aggie.
So, and so I called him up and I told him about this young man who had written to me.
And he said, oh, I know him.
And he said, oh, we'll Xerox some of these books for you if you can get them.
So we got all these books together between my collection, the department's collection, the libraries letting us Xerox their books.
And then we got the help of the alumni office.
And they, we got them all together and the alumni office packed and sent all of these books out to this carrier and to this.
That was our contribution to the Gulf War.
You may have violated some copyright law in there buying those copies.
I may have.
It's perfect.
I didn't even think about that.
I just thought that, I mean, we were going to further the education of those Marine officers.
A couple of things before we run down.
With, like all of these letters from students and so forth, at some point, I hope that you will consider
of leaving those to the archives here?
I have been giving my papers to the archives.
But I haven't given any of those yet.
But I have kept them.
At some point.
Yes.
Because those are things of the sort we don't have much.
That's right.
Let's see.
Let's make believe that somebody were to give you a check for a million dollars now with only one condition.
You have to give it to Texas A&M.
but you decide what use would be made of that million dollars.
What would you have A&M do if you had the capability to give them a million dollars?
Boy, that's a tough question.
And it's a tough question because I'm torn between the library and of building the program in the history department.
There's so many areas where we really need to build our program.
I don't know.
I think it would be a tough call.
But those would be the two places that I'd want to really work.
All right.
For this interview, let's close with this question.
What feelings do you have in your heart about Texas A&M today, now?
Well, I would be, I love Texas A&M.
I mean, and that has so much to do with this big family of Aggies who have stayed in touch with me for so many years.
Do you know that I have students who are writing to me since 1968?
And now their children are coming to my classes because their fathers told them, when you go to, you go in Dr. Underberger's class.
The managing editor, for example, of the newspaper, Eagle,
was his daughter was recently in my class.
She came to me and she said, my father said, I had to take your class.
And I have another student, Amanda Brooks.
Her father is a professor of history now at one of the community colleges.
And she is finishing graduate work now in history.
She was a student here.
And she's trying to get some fellowships to go abroad.
She was in my class.
My father said, I had to come and take your class.
Well, I mean, of course, that sort of dates me, doesn't it?
When I get the children and the brothers and sisters of Aggies.
And they say, you go and take Professor Winterberger's class.
Well, it gives me a feeling that somehow I have made a difference in the lives of these young people.
And, you know, it's like an extended family.
It's like an extended family.
So I can't, just my association with the students has been, I think,
one of the greatest aspects of being here and of having the opportunity to really I think open their hearts and minds to a broader view of life and relationships and
An appreciation, I think, particularly of the liberal arts, because I think that is one of the areas where Texas A&M certainly must expand.
They have got to, of course, recognize that any great university must have at its core a great liberal arts college, and they just need to look around at the great universities to see that that is so.
and to the extent that I've played some part.